you only have to do that for 30 seconds
that will burn 40% more fat than even
high-intensity interval training really
so it begins with Dr Vonda Wright is a
renowned orthopedic surgeon and a
pioneering researcher in mobility and
aging through simple methods she enables
people to maintain their strength all
the way through till their later life we
have no excuse until our mid 70s for
slowing down these are MRI slices of a
40-year-old athlete we have beautiful
muscle architecture but if we sit around
for 35 years and have a desk job and we
don't go move our muscles this is what
happens Jesus my God but this is a 74y
old who just invested in their Mobility
four to five times a week so if you're
an 80-year-old consistently lifting
weights you are functionally as strong
as a 60-year-old person who doesn't but
I worry about joint pain is joint pain
inevitable it is not but one reason
people have pain is because of how much
we weigh small changes in our total body
weight can have profound effects on the
joint pain we feel let's say this rock
is 1 lb if you gain one lb you would
think that this is all the amount of
pressure you're going to feel but
because of the mechanics what you
actually feel is the weight of these
bricks so you think gaining 10 lbs
doesn't mean much but imagine gaining
100 lb of pressure so how should you be
investing in your Mobility every day
there are four components that we should
try to find time for number one
is quick one before we get back to this
episode just give me 30 seconds of your
time two things I wanted to say the
first thing is a huge thank you for
listening and tuning into the show week
after week it means the well to all of
us and this really is a dream that we
absolutely never had and couldn't have
imagined getting to this place but
secondly it's a dream where we feel like
we're only just getting started and if
you enjoy what we do here please join
the 24% of people who watch this channel
regularly and have hit the Subscribe
button means more than I can say and if
you hit that subscribe button here's a
promise I'm going to make to you I'm
going to do everything in my power to
make this show as good as I can now and
into the future we're going to deliver
the guests that you want me to speak to
and we're going to continue to keep
doing all of the things you love about
the show thank you thank you so much
back to the
episode Dr vonder Wright you've been
treating patients learning about
medicine taking care of people and
working in the industry you've worked in
for almost 35 years now
to do that yes you must have a great
deal of passion you must be on a bit of
a mission so my my first question to you
is as you sit here today what is what is
occupying your your focus your mind your
passion what is that when you wake up in
the morning and you think about the work
you're doing and why you're doing it
what is the answer to
that the answer to the question of why I
wake up every day and and rush into my
work whether it's into the surgery or
whether it's into taking care of IND
individuals or writing is
because I have been working under the
Mantra of um I'm going to change the way
we age in this country or in this world
because when I started there was this
steadfast belief the the national
Zeitgeist has changed now but when I
started there was this belief that aging
was an inevitable decline from the
Vitality of Youth down a slippery slope
to Frailty where we would spend 20 years
of Our Lives dying going to the doctor's
office every 3 years and I never ever
believed that I never believed it and
maybe it was because when I was a child
I lived at in the 70s where you could
just take your kid with you to a race
and my dad would do that and he he'd
take me to a 5K and say wait here I'll
be back in 20 minutes and I would see
people in their 50s and 60s racing and
they would be celebrated or or maybe
it's because I started as a cancer nurse
and I saw
people fighting every day for their
lives and I believed that that was not
the destiny that we
were that we were doomed to so as I
progressed through my career and I
started doing the research myself I
realize that this myth we had in our
country that or all over the world that
aging had to be this inevitable decline
was based on population studies and what
does that mean well population studies
just just look at a cohort of people and
see what happens over time there's a
huge study uh funded by the NIH in the
United States called the health ABC for
instance and they looked at a population
of 70 year olds and just followed them
over time well what do we know about
populations of people well what we know
is that up to 70% of them do not do one
extra step of Mobility a day so what we
know about aging has been what we know
about sedentary living and so
I did not believe that we truly
understood how the trajectory of our
aging could be for people who remained
active across the course of their lives
so my team and I did that original
research and we proved that you can be
healthy vital active joyful long into
the foreseeable future much more than we
gave ourselves credit for and it drives
me because even over all these years 35
years 20 years of it as an orthopedic
surgeon it is only now that people are
beginning to pick up the mantle of
prevention and not only disease care and
so sometimes I sit back and I think oh
my God you know I've been preparing for
this time in the history of people my
whole career so I am made for such a
time as now so interesting because it's
only in recent times I think from doing
this podcast that I started to question
the idea the sort of Mind virus that
even I had that once I get to a certain
age I just have to kind of concede to
the inevitable Decline and it's only
recently that I thought actually there's
been a couple of people that have came
here and told me about how to that
that's not the case and actually it is a
bit of a mind virus like the virus of
that belief the impact of that belief is
what causes you to give up yes and just
to become frail and to stop moving and
those kinds of things well because what
that our brain tells us we know this
I've and you've had many discussions
about the connection between our brain
and our body our brain will believe
whatever we tell it and if our brain
thinks that oh sometime 63 a light bulb
goes off and we go from youthful vigor
to aging and decline well then we start
believing that about ourselves
and you know there's a concept now that
I work with all the time that really
examines the difference between life
expectancy in the UK life expectancy
right now is 81 unfortunately in the
United States at 77.6 from the from
birth babies born now have a life
expectancy of that much our health
expectancy our health span the amount of
healthiness we have is only about
63 so that gives us a huge Runway to
change the trajectory and it
also tells us that we're not dying at
63 we're dying on average at 81 so we
can do everything we possibly can in
those 20 years and we also know that 70
to 80 to 90% depending on who you
believe of our health and aging is
predetermined by our lifestyle choices
not the genes we inherit so my mother is
very thankful that I stop blaming her
for all the health things that go on but
but each and every person has the
ability to live outside of their genetic
predisposition and that is a very
hopeful message that can pivot your
mindset virus I I took the top sort of
illnesses and diseases things like heart
disease lung cancer um I can't even
pronounce this one chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease yeah COPD Strokes
lower lower respiratory infections
Alzheimer's disease type two diabetes I
can't pronounce this one either col
colon rectal cancers colon rectal
cancers I nailed that breast cancer and
prostate cancer and got the average ages
that typical people typically get them
then I weighted it by the amount of
people that die um from each of those
diseases with heart disease being the
most popular and it did actually come up
I used chat TPT I'm pretending I did
this math myself it came up that 62.9
for years old is the exact age where on
average I'm going to get one of these
and I'm going to potentially die from
one of these those are when they
manifest you may have them before them
they're not maybe you never knew it
because I have people who say to me when
I ask them their health history what
medical problems do you have and they're
like I don't have any only because
they've never been to a doctor or maybe
they've been diagnosed but they haven't
gotten so bad that they're not spending
three days a week in the doctor's office
or maybe they they are sick those three
categories right but your chat GPT data
is correct that that is when it shows up
and what does that correspond to that
corresponds to when the average person
retires so just when you start thinking
you have time to live the life that you
envision you're saddled with health
problems that you have not taken care of
but but think about it this way talking
about this mind virus and how we need to
change it um we can talk about this but
I think that 40 is the most remarkable
decade of a person's life and it's also
the time to adult or get your
ferbal explo together it's time to get
it together from a health
perspective well between 40 if you're
just noticing your health at that time
because maybe you've been working so
hard and you never noticed it before
you're raising other people or whatever
the circumstances
are between 40 and 63 you have time to
course correct but if you decide at
63 to pay attention it is much much much
harder and so you know part of my
Mission you ask me why I wake up every
morning to change the way we age in this
country is to not only take care of
people in my demographic my middle-aged
demographic but to really get to my
Millennial children and my Millennial
nieces and nephews to say you have such
control over your health if you just
look up and pay
attention what's your academic education
can you run me through your s
qualifications and how that pivoted and
turned uh throughout your career sure I
have a degree in biology uh from Wheaten
college and then immediately after that
uh there was such a shortage of nurses
that they the UN Rush University said if
you have a good Bachelor's Degree come
we'll give we'll train you in another
bachelor's degree in nursing and a
master's degree in three years so I did
and with that I went and took care of
people with cancer and ran the rush
Cancer Institute with the physician that
was there at the time and then at 28 I
decided to that through a series of
decisions we can talk about that um I
wanted to do great research but I still
needed to take care of people because it
is in my heart and soul to do that and
so I went back to medical school at the
University of Chicago at 28 only to
choose the longest possible road which
is orthopedic surgery which is an
additional 11 years because it's four
years of medical school 6 years of
residency a year of fellowship and then
I finally emerged what is orthopedic
surgery
oh we have yeah so orthopedic surgery is
the lifetime care of the musculoskeletal
system so what that includes is Bones
tendons ligaments muscle adapost tissue
it's the joints the from the spine to
the shoulders hips the knees it's
everything from cancer care of those
organs through each one of those has a
sub specialty hand uh foot
Sports I'm a sports surgeon so I'm
trained in shoulder hip and knee
arthroscopy meaning I do very big
surgery through very small apertures uh
for athletes and active people um but
this fun Orthopedic Sports career I've
had of taking care of active people and
athletes of all ages and skill
levels extends outside of the operating
Suite right I have I take care of the
whole person which is unusual for an
orthopedic surgeon usually orthopedic
surgeons are very procedurally driven
but I am whole person driven and I think
that stems from at 23 years old taking
care of people in the fight of their
lives knowing that their whole lives are
worth taking care of not just pushing
chemo in the middle of the
night when you say you focus on the
whole person can you help me understand
that cuz I think on one end of that
spectrum is doing the surgery yes which
you do and then is the other end of that
Spectrum thinking about their I guess
their psychology their emotions how
they're feeling what I'll give you a few
examples so if you're a uh you think of
a sports surgeon taking care of young
athletes so if I have a young athlete
come in who I have I'll give you an
example of a real person he's 19 he has
been an athlete his entire life and just
and been great at it right but never
been hurt had the great Fortune of never
being hurt until he stepped wrong he got
slide tackled on the football field and
he blew out his knee and his family was
moving so he didn't get Immediate Care
like he could have had he been in his
own town so weeks later he shows up to
me with a knee that's completely
nonfunctioning this child who's a
19-year-old man is panicking in his
brain he doesn't know why he's in so
much pain why his knee won't work um
psychosocially his family is in
transition they don't have any of the
support system and he no longer has his
own team so that young man is dealing
not only with the physical pain of
injury
he's dealing with the psychological
anxiety of oh my God oh my God oh my God
what just happened to my knee will I
ever play again and they're dealing with
the social aspects of here's a family
without social support So as a whole
person doctor realiz viewing this family
not not only as their Sports surgeon you
have an ACL tear you're meniscus teared
here's how I'm going to fix it here's
what we need to do before then here's
the technical aspects of the surgery but
how much protein are you eating because
I need your body in tiptop shape to heal
so I talk to my patients about their
nutrition as well as their surgical but
then from the perspective of I too am a
mother with a lot of children thinking
of myself how am I going to meet the
needs of my child thinking of the mother
she has no resources in this town she
just moved here right trying to set them
up with the the other people they will
need to be surrounded with care
and that approach to this individual
family is
exactly the surrounding them with care
approach we take with professional
athletes there is not one thing that is
left unturned for a professional athlete
we take care of them from the minute
they wake up to the minute they go to
bed and their family needs so this whole
person care extends all the way across
all types of people for a woman for
instance who comes with a it's so
typical for a midlife women to come in
with an inflamed shoulder a frozen
shoulder she'll come in because her
shoulder no longer moves but knowing
what I know about the life cycle of a
woman and what happens in midlife before
I even address the
shoulder
because sometimes they come insane to me
without any prompting I think I'm
falling apart and sometimes I think I'm
going crazy cuz I didn't do it anything
to my shoulder right when they say that
to me we immediately start talking about
well how are you sleeping are you having
any hot flashes night sweat so so that I
address them as a midlife woman who's
lost their estrogen not just as a
shoulder that doesn't work because for
me that's pretty cut and dry it's the
rest of it that truly is taking care of
the whole person so that's what it means
to
me it's um it's personal to you isn't it
I I feel like you have a great deal of
empathy I can feel it on your on the
surface of you I can see it in your face
yeah where does that come
from you know I think I think that I a
much better listen you make people cry
on this podcast and I think you're going
to make me cry and I don't mean to but
that kind of
question I think that
this unrelenting need to take care of
the whole person has to have come from
my time as a cancer nurse because I was
only I was only 22 22 to 28 I was a
cancer nurse and imagine what it's like
to be so impressionable right you I got
all this education but in the middle so
my job was giving chemotherapy to people
who were in The Struggle of their life
and I'm 23 years old and chemo is pushed
in the middle of the night and at the
time in the '90s we did something called
primary nursing which means every time
that person came in if you would have
come in I would have been your nurse
every time you're in the hospital every
month for 6 months so the kind of
therapeutic relationship you develop is
Meaningful and so I was 23 years old 23
to 28 the format of times of how I built
my perspective on the world and I'll
never forget this is the one story
there's so many stories like this but
this is the one story that answers that
question I think why this is personal to
me so I'm taking care of this woman and
you know many many of the people I took
care of won their battles you know they
I was with them for 6 months every night
some nights because people just want to
feel normal I'm giving them their chemo
they're watching TV and buying stuff
online on the TV and I'm like why are
you buying all this because they just
want to feel like themselves right and
many many people successfully walked out
and forgot forgot our names right but
not everybody did and so this one
family she had been with us for six
months
and I don't know if you've ever been
around people who are losing their
battle with an illness or are are are
living the last days of their lives but
you can tell it's coming just by the way
they breathe it is true people rally
right before they die and so I knew this
woman's time was coming but she had the
most faithful family Stephen her family
came every single day and she had a big
family and we knew they were coming they
were kind of loud and and we loved
having them here but the night that
answers this question I knew it was
going to be our last night you can
always tell and it was just she and I
and the the light in a hospital room
there's a light over the bed and then
the bed so there's this light behind her
and she's breathing in an agonal way but
I can tell that she's waiting she knows
her family is going to come the next
morning so we make it through the night
it's just she and I and and in the
morning and this Hospital in Chicago
there's a a window at the end of the
hallway that faces Lake Michigan and the
light starts coming in the floor lights
up again and that's starting to happen
it's about 7:00 and I hear the elevator
Bing and it was her family coming so I
step out into the hallway and this one
was different they always came together
every day but this time her sister was
dressed in her wedding gown and the
whole family with it was in their
tuxedos cuz her sister was going to get
married that day and they wanted her to
be part of that even though there was no
way she was ever going to be part of
that so I I'm 23 years old I'm standing
in the doorway my patient is over here
her family is coming towards me and that
indelibly seared in me the the balance
between life and death the woman who is
not going to continue her journey and
her sister who is beginning her journey
and I don't know how at 23 years old for
that not to impact what I care about in
life Stephen if you come to my house I
don't give a rat's ass about my curtains
or buying the shoes with the red Souls
even though I can but at 23 that kind of
life and death made me decide that
people were worth working for and worth
saving and so she had waited for them to
come to her that day so she could share
in the last family time they were going
to have together and I don't think you
come out of a situation like that
without your whole life perspective
being different and so even though you
know I'm a sports doctor now how is that
remotely as hard as being a cancer nurse
I am a much better doctor now than I
would have ever been had I gone straight
into
medicine what is that that perspective
it's given you specifically that then
translates to being an even better
Sports Doctor how does it change how you
it means that I can't view the procedure
as just putting screws in the ACL or
what I tried out a new ACL procedure
last week it was fascinating but
sometimes that is the beginning and the
end that's not the beginning and the end
for me how this kid it was this
19-year-old kid how this kid is going to
recover in six to n months and go back
to living the life he envisions how he's
not going to feel abandoned by the sport
that he loved or how am I going to help
him find a new team because sport is is
not only an individual thing it's an
entire environment it's the it's the the
society the kid lives in so for me it's
not just the cool new technique I did on
Wednesday in the O it's taking care of
per that whole person through the whole
journey for the next nine
months the lady that you were taking
care of when you were 23 years old has
that impacted what how you
view death yeah it has I view
death we're all going to die
Stephen how rapidly we get there can
change how we arrive there can change
how we feel about our life can change
but we're all going to get
there so I don't I don't view it as
something to run away from at all in
fact in some circumstances in some of my
patients circumstances or even as an
orthopedic surgeon in some of the
traumas I've been involved in I think
death can be kindness and death can be
done with extreme
dignity I don't think it's always the
enemy one of the things that I think is
is
also um really sort of friend of mind in
that image of the lady in the in the bed
when her sister arrives in the wedding
dress is that she had friends and family
there oh my goodness and a lot of people
you know right there's so much Beauty in
that moment regardless of the the um the
reality of what's going on there that
she's losing her life but she's losing
it surrounded by yeah a group of people
that love her and I think for many of us
I think I actually had a conversation
with a good friend the other day and
their their biggest fear in life is that
they'll actually end up aging and dying
alone because they don't have children
yet and they don't have children at all
they made the decision not to have
children um they don't have siblings
so you know I'm not scared of death I'd
like to extend my health span but um
when I do die I would like to have
people around me that love me and that's
one of the things that I think she she
clearly had yeah she's he did it's funny
you mention that I think about that what
happens if we live so long in our quest
for longevity that everybody we love or
raised has already gone before us and I
don't know what do I do would I hire the
girl next door to sit with me take me to
my doctor's appointments yeah I don't
know what to do I could probably pay a
few people a little bit it takes a
little bit of
planning so if we if we talk then about
this health ban issue and your central
Mission which you described at the start
usually when I have these conversations
I try and Hazard a guess where I should
but I actually want I want you to tell
me where we should be beginning if we're
talking about extending our health span
where where does that begin why do we
need to startop this conversation that
begins when your parents are raising you
and they have the choice of teaching you
how to eat teaching
you I'm old enough that literally I got
a cell phone at 38 so this is not a
problem with me growing up but there's a
problem now where we don't send kids out
due to safety and digital to just go
play and don't come in until dinner that
was a real real thing when I was growing
up and so what we know is
children's uh mitochondrial load meaning
how many of our Powerhouse mitochondria
metabolic um
Kingpin are really predetermined by how
active we are as a child so it's really
a concern for those of us interested in
metab metabolic health is what are we
doing when we raise our children to sit
around for the first 10 years of our of
their lives when they're really made to
run around right so it begins with what
we teach our children and I think I hear
parents a lot of times saying oh my kid
won't eat this or that or I can't get
them to do anything and I'm not scolding
them when I respond in the way I'm about
to respond to you I get it I'm the
mother of a blended family of six
children and you can't always make your
children do things but here's what I
know children learn from what they see
my children were foam rolling with us
they learned to eat vegetables or they
didn't get up from table or they learn
what we teach them so the time to begin
is when uh our children are little some
would say the time to begin is in utero
which is frightening because I might
have done things differently during my
pregnancy but when they're little but as
they're being raised I certainly think
the time to really begin is no later
than your mid-30s I call between mid-30s
to mid-40s with 40 being the center of
that the critical decade literally we're
not children anymore we've at 30 the
literature says we've probably maxed our
bone out we've probably maxed our muscle
out wait what you mean I'm 30 I know
think about you right now what do you
think I've maxed my muscle out my it
means that some some scientists muscle
scientists believe that at 30 we've got
our Peak muscle mass and unless we
really invest in growing more muscle the
rest of our lives like if you choose to
be sedentary the rest of your lives you
Peak at 30 and you're using it the rest
of your life right and
so same with bone bone maxes out at
about 30 unless we continue to invest in
it well what do we know 70% of our
population is is sedentary and don't
reinvest so between 35 and 45 I call it
the critical decade if you've never
thought about your health before Now's
the Time to hone in we need Baseline
Labs we need your first physical we need
some your first screening exams I think
men this is not policy anywhere but I
think as I'm trying to replace
testosterone and men in the future I
don't know what I'm raising them up to I
know I'm putting them with when in a
within a healthy range but I would want
to return you to what your testosterone
was when you were a young man like you
are now and not just guest I think we
need first Labs first physicals um to be
more of a Quantified Self just like you
we were talking earlier you saw a human
brain for the first time to notice our
bodies so that we can take better care
of them early so that we can then do the
exercise prescription that I'm sure will
talk about
um going forward because it becomes very
very hard with every decade but I think
for men 40 to 50 is a an amazing decade
for you for a lot of reasons for women I
think between 35 and 45 is critically
the time to get our stuff together
before our hor hormones start walking
out the door so it it's much earlier
than you would suspect if you if you
suspected maybe 50 is the age maybe 60
no too late not too late much harder
right yeah you know what I there's this
image that I saw online the other day
and I saved it as a bookmark actually
wasn't connected to me speaking Che but
I just found it to be fting cuz it's
part of this emerging picture in my mind
about the importance of muscle and one
of the things you said there is you
think we'd reach our Peak muscle by
early 30s According to some sort of
muscle scientists is does that kind of
correlate to what I'm seeing here I'll
put this on the screen for anyone that
can't see I'll link it in the
description below but on this graph
which we'll call figure number one graph
number one are you saying to me that the
peak point there is around 30 yeah and
then from it's sort of downhill from
there so on you know on this SC the peak
if we call it 30 this is a precipitous
decline it looks very hopeless that what
I believe and what our research shows is
that you can extend this green line into
a more flat curve so that you
die quickly maybe in your sleep yeah
like thiso done okay instead of this
steady decline over time but if we do
not reinvest in our health and Mobility
every day our muscle wastes our V2 Max
or our cardiovascular health declines
10% per decade so it's like what happens
if you have a Formula 1 car and you get
it all maximized it takes one big race
and then you never reinvest in it I mean
our bodies are not unlike a machine when
you talk about lean muscle mass what
does what is lean muscle mass I know
what muscles are but what's lean muscle
yeah you know what I say lean muscle
mass and people are like what do you
mean lean versus fatty muscle mass what
I'm talking about is your skeletal
muscle mass we have three kinds of
muscle we have smooth muscle which is
what our guts are it's the peristalsis
that's happening in our intestines our
cardiac muscle the muscle that will that
is our heart that's the cardiac muscle
um and it beats unto itself it has its
own electrical Rhythm the rest of the
muscle in our body is striated skeletal
muscle so every time you do this it's
with a type of muscle called skeletal
muscle we have 650 skeletal muscles it
is the reason you move uh it is muscle
is not only important for Locomotion but
it's very metabolically active it sends
off hormones that help control other
processes in your body it's where most
of your mitochondria which are the
powerhouses of your body take glucose
from your blood and turn it into energy
so it has a lot of roles most of us just
think about it as what you see in the
mirror at the gym bigger and bigger but
it serves the function of locomotion and
Metabolism you did a study yes I did um
and I think that's the picture I have
here which talks about 2012 so what I'll
put this on the screen again this is
picture number two for anybody that's
listening on audio and wants to see the
photos um this is a pretty startling
image it is um and it scares me please
can you explain what it is it shouldn't
scare you because you are healthy and at
you are going to be mobile every day
when you leave me here but so remember
that study I introduced the health ABC
which was an nah funded study of a group
of 70y olds they just took a cohort of
7-year-olds and watched what happened
over a decade yeah well they did a
similar study as this uh using CAT scans
I used MRIs and what they found is that
uh that what they described as the
inevitable decline of muscle the
inevitable infiltration of your muscle
with fat like marbling and I said that
cannot be true that is what happened
happens if you are sedentary and sit
around for the trajectory of your life
so because I'm a sports doctor I am
surrounded by Master's athletes so I did
a study of Master's athletes from 40 to
85 what this picture is is MRI slices in
their mid thigh so MRIs take pictures of
us using a magnet and creates these
beautiful pictures so at the top picture
is the MRI slice of a 40-year-old and my
athletes were usually Runners are
triathletes of the thigh of a
40-year-old so I'll describe this for
you it's gorgeous yeah it's beautiful
yes we have beautiful muscle
architecture of the quadriceps on the
top the hamstrings on the bottom the
bone has a nice cortex there's very
little peripheral fat and when I looked
inside the muscle uh with a microscope
and special software there was not
infiltration of fat or marbling so if
you want to say it colloquially this is
a flank steak Yeah with no marbling this
is lean muscle if we sit around for 35
years and have a desk job and we and we
sit at the desk uh 10 hours a day and we
don't go move our muscles we're not
purposeful this is what happens we lose
our muscle
architecture these muscles are are
almost you can't even tell what they are
uh what's the age of that person this is
a 74 year old now I had a large group
this is one representative person in
each of the groups this is the control
group
but the center one the muscle I'll tell
you is grossly fatty infiltrated It is
Well marbled it is like a Colby beef and
then there's a thick rind of peripheral
fat this is a picture of what we called
sarc obesity meaning we have loss of
muscle sarcopenia and we have obesity
excess adapost tissue oh so the white
area is the fatat and the middle part is
the muscle musle yes and so you know
you'll see people walking around with
these big old thighs well the truth is
um sometimes a lot of that is fatty rind
but look what happens if we invest every
day in our Mobility my athletes in this
study were not professional athletes
they were recreational people like you
and me who had just invested in their
Mobility four to five times a week this
is the picture the third picture is a
70-year-old triathlete if you didn't
know better you would say that I just
took another slice of The 40-Year-Old
and put it down
here very little peripheral fat very
little fatty infiltration and amazing
muscle architecture and when we looked
at the
strength of this person compared to this
person there was virtually no difference
there was a small difference but we know
from other people's studies that um
lifting weights consistently infers a
20-year Advantage such that if you're an
80-year-old consistently lifting weights
you are functionally as strong as a 60
year old person who doesn't and so not
only does this study show us that by
investing every day in our
Mobility that we can retain our muscle
mass that has implications for Frailty
that has implications for activity and
what's interesting about that picture
Stephen once I published it it has taken
on a life of its own it is like
everywhere on the internet because the
reaction is so startling with people
thinking oh my God am in control of my
health and aging and I couldn't be more
pleased about that no it is it is
Unforgettable yeah in every sense of the
word I can't believe that the thing that
really obviously shocks me is the
40-year-old um Cal muscles they C for
thigh thigh thigh muscle Y
isstring and that's a triathlete is
arguably not as good as the 70-year-old
triathletes I would actually say that
the 7y old people no I think the
70-year-old wins
and that is that is startling because I
I thought that aging muscle decline the
sort of syence I think it's called of
the of the body and the muscles is
inevitable and this is unequivocal
evidence that it's not that if I make
good decisions now if I become a
triathlete I can have the flank stake
thighs when I'm 70 what it tells you is
that there is no age or time in your
life when your body will not respond to
the positive stress you put upon it
and it takes daily investment it's not
like you can store it all up and then
ride on
it it yeah it's so so important one of
the things that's been a real Revelation
for me is this idea that muscle is so
critical as I get older yeah um I often
think about different exercises that I
should be doing as I age and you know
sometimes I think about um running but I
but it's I don't know I worry about
joint pains and stuff yeah so I'm a bit
of an upper body workout freak I just
focus on my upper body um what do you
think of my exercise regim what should I
be adding to it to make sure that I can
have the flank Stak thighs but also just
a longer Health span you know what's
critical uh for long-term function is
being able to stay upright so it's all
great that you've making big arms and
have upper body strength can do pull-ups
and lift your suitcase above the in the
airplane thanks but what you really want
to do when you're
97 is walk anywhere you want to go up
and down the stairs to you know drive
any car you want to and that takes lower
body strength so all your biggest
muscles in your body are below your
belly button so if I were you and had
all this trajectory of time I would work
equally as hard on my my glutes my quads
my hamstrings my calves every muscle
below your body but not only would I
work on my strength to get bigger but I
would
focus on Power and those are different
lifting techniques right the hypertrophy
aspect of growing big muscles because
they look really great uh you do now and
I am not a I am not a a trainer but I've
done this quite a while so trainers
you're welcome to add in but uh you do
more reps of lighter
weights because that will stimulate
hypertrophy if we're truly building
hypertrophy a growth of muscle bigger
biceps if we're truly interested in
power and Longevity which is why I lift
I lift for longevity and power because I
am not going to be that little old lady
frail in a bed unless I can help it
right I mean I'm going to help it I'm so
determined um I want to be able to lift
heavy so that is fewer reps but much
heavier weight so number one you got to
lift with your legs number
two people become frail for a number of
reason reasons but another reason people
lose their independence is they lose
their ability to balance and they're
falling all the time and when you fall
no matter how good your bones are you're
liable to break something and so I
always train my people not only in
muscle building or carrying a load as I
like to call it but in equilibrium and
foot speed so in the in the place I put
my office it's a performance center it's
surrounded with all the bells and
whistles of the best performance stuff
and we have a Speed and Agility coach
who usually works with Elite division
one track athletes well I had her design
foot Speed and Agility drills for
midlife people because I do this all the
time I put my my red work bag too close
to my desk I get up quickly my bag's in
the way and I trip but because I've got
the foot speed I can hop over it but if
I hadn't retrained that I might have
tripped over it and landed on my hip and
broen something so it's important as
we're going forward yes I want you to
increase your muscle lifting in your
lower body but I want you to work on
Speed and Agility drills so you stay
Nimble stay a able to balance and don't
fall down if you fall down if you trip
to your bag what's the knock on effect
of that because you just heal right I
just heal yeah yeah I just I ran a
Spartan Race recently and fell off an8
foot ring and didn't break so I am
working towards being unbreakable in my
own life that what I want to happen for
you but if you're if you're not
unbreakable what happens when you trip
over your bag and fall is you could
break your hip and then what happens
yeah well if you're of any age but
particularly older when you fall and
break your
hip 50% of the time you do not return to
preall function which means you cannot
live in the home you raised your
children you cannot drive your car bones
are bones and adults take about 3 months
to to heal imagine being down for that
amount of time and unfortunately in men
greater than women 30% of people die in
the first year from the complications of
being that sick with a hip fracture so
you know as your orthopedic surgeon I am
desperate to prevent Frailty I am
desperate to prevent you from falling
and succumbing to that sequella so we
got to lift weights with our rear end
and our legs we got to work on our Speed
and Agility
think it was you that used this term the
sitting
epidemic what is the sitting
epidemic the sitting epidemic is what
we're doing in our country uh when
we in every aspect of Our Lives whether
we're working we're working but we're
sitting at a table we're uh playing
we're sitting and we're playing on our
phone or watching something it is the
epidemic where we're
spending I don't know 10 14 hours a day
sitting in this position in fact I was
thinking about it if it was logist
logistically possible for a three-hour
interview we should go for a
walk not so much but but it's the
epidemic of sitting around what does
sitting around do well it sends us
towards a pathway of something called
sedentary death syndrome I wish I had
made that up but I didn't a professor
out of Columbia University in Missouri
made up this term that I've been using
my whole career to describe what happens
to us when we sit our entire lives
sedentary death syndrome are the 33
chronic diseases that we die of
including the top five cardiovascular
disease stroke cancer um even even
things like
fracture that are completely impacted in
a positive way by
Mobility so if we could eliminate
sedentary living from our lives we could
probably live better and that was the
whole supposition of all these studies I
did in the beginning of my career at the
University of Pittsburgh was to prove
that if we took sedentary living out of
our vocabulary that we could save our
bones we Pro that with two studies our
muscles we proved it with the one that
you just saw we could save our brains we
were one of the first to do brain
studies looking at the effect of
Mobility on their brain and it's a very
hopeful picture it's super interesting
this subject I this week had a friend of
mine diagnosed with I think he'd slipped
like two discs in his back or something
I disc five and six or something and he
sent a X-ray of his back into the group
chat and I thought oh this is so
interesting because I've had lots of
conversations with people on my podcast
about sitting and all of these things I
spoke to one particular guy called David
raiklin who went and studied the hadza
tribe in Africa I believe which is a
hunter gatherer tribe and what he found
is they do sit for about 9 or 10 hours a
day but they they squat they squat I
knew that yes so we sit in not sitting
they're squatting he told me that I
think it was him and um Daniel liberman
told me that they had brought brought a
chair over there yeah and like these HS
tribe had like never seen a chair before
so when they like walked off to go to
the toilet the heads were all sitting in
the chair no but they they would take
the chair and be like oh my God so like
all the chairs were taken cuz they just
loved the chairs cuz they'd like never
had chairs before so the the researchers
like couldn't find a chair cuz all the
heads were like chilling in the chairs
but typically when they they sit for 10
hours a day they're doing this little
mini squat thing which means their
muscles are still activated but also I
think the posture in which they they
squat is their backs are straight yes
and it got sent me down this Rabbit Hole
this weekend literally this weekend
looking at why sort of 80% of Americans
will complain about back problems but
the hads a tribe back problems aren't
even like a thing there he told me it
like almost doesn't exist the idea of
having a back problem but 80% of us are
going to have back problems it's endemic
well think about it if we weren't trying
if I weren't trying to be on my best
behavior I'd be sitting in this chair
like this right like a c-shaped launched
over my front core is completely relaxed
my back core is relaxed and stretched
out and so over time they just get weak
in atrophy it's like laying in a bed
there's no stimulus for them plus my
shoulders get all hunched over and my
posture becomes like this and so that's
why we just sit in chairs and atrophy
when you're squatting and I posted
recently challenging people to see if
they could do a squat like that or get
up from a squat like that and the
response I got was overwhelmingly oh my
God I can't do that I'll work on it
because we're so used to sitting in
chairs they can't do like a single squ
these people were saying to get down
getting down people can do sometimes
with falling over getting up is the
problem what would you recommend yeah in
order to avoid the back pains the sort
of sedentary death syndrome or whatever
it was called what do I do because I
have to run a business I work in an
office at a desk yes well you know what
even simple things uh for instance I
bought my assistant a standing desk
because when I'm in clinic all day uh
for 10 hours the choice for him was
sitting at a desk or standing at his
standing desk and so that can go a long
way number one number two taking many
blasts of Mobility right getting up
running out the stairs be a fidgety
person go to the
copy or get steps and just be moving all
the time the other thing honestly nobody
knows when you're on a phone call what
you're doing you could be wall squatting
in fact I have challenged whole groups
of people in their next board meeting to
wall squat the whole time no I don't
know how much thinking would go on but
just adding little things like add that
in you don't have to sit to take a phone
call um even in a zoom meeting I mean
people have seen worse than you doing a
wall squat you know in the time of covid
I I was wondering this morning um on my
way here cuz I was in the bathroom and I
dropped something on the floor can't was
it might be in the toothpaste or
something and I went down to pick it up
and my my back is just like so tight is
it like my whole I feel like my whole Bo
I'm so unflexible I like went down to
pick it up and the way that I go down
and pick it up is you'd think I was you
know I was going to say an age then but
that's kind of after seeing
that like this guy's got better
flexibility than me but I just feel like
you're stiff I'm stiff as hell and I
don't know what to do about it I I think
there's like a I don't know is it a
joint pain joint pains that I have or is
it just I don't I've don't have strong
Coe it could be all those things so when
I talk to people about to go to tie into
the other question how should you be
working out how should you be investing
in your Mobility every day uh there are
four components that that we should try
to find time for number one is
flexibility and dynamic stretching so
that means is is warming up every single
joint in your body every day and that
can be as as simple as seriously a set
of jumping jacks doing uh there's
something called an inchworm where it's
like a push-up position and you walk
your feet up and that'll warm up your
ankles your knees your hips your
shoulders but going through a dynamic
warm-up every day to warm up the joint
putting them through demanding they go
through a full range of motion and then
not forgetting after you work out to
static stretch we don't static stretch
before we work out we static stretch
after a static stretch is what we were
taught in in elementary school with you
know you stand against a wall you hold
the stretch for 30 seconds that happens
in every body part after you work out
before you dynamically warm up and so
that's when things like yoga and pilates
and whether it's reformer pilates or uh
floor Pilates or can be great for people
to me that is the the salt and pepper of
your workout regimen it's not just what
you do it's what you sprinkle over it so
that's number one flexibility a oh
because the acronym I use is face just
so people remember F flexibility a is
aerobic right we can talk about that c
is this weightlifting we talked about C
carry a load e is equilibrium and
balance so when you were reaching over
and thinking you were so if you could
still do it because you're in your 30s
you still have the youthful pliability
to do it imagine you're 60 now and you
haven't done anything about it and
nothing's moving and you reach over and
you don't have the foot speed to catch
yourself you fall over it happens all
the time from a standing position so the
way I teach people to retrain their
balance literally is to stand on one
foot while you're brushing your teeth
every morning because the perturbation
of moving your whole body requires core
strength strength it requires propi
reception and that's how you'll retrain
that particular motion so I really need
to introduce something like Pilates or
yoga to my or just daily stretching okay
for how
long um well if you stretch every you
dynamically warm up before you do
anything including your weightlifting
and then um the static stretching
afterwards of every major muscle group
whether it's your triceps or whether
it's your hamstrings are critical for
low back pain or your calves you hold
the stretch without bouncing for 30
seconds and what you'll feel is at the
end of the 30 seconds you'll kind of
relax into it and you'll get more of a
stretch and you only do four reps you
are going to get most of the benefit of
that stretching after four reps but I
don't want you to only do that I find
many people asking me I do Pilates in
yoga is that enough for me and I say
that's great but it's never going to be
enough
one of the other things which is related
to this that people see as being
inevitable is this idea of joint pain we
think we kind of just get joint pain as
we age is joint pain inevitable you've
actually brought a big bone with you
today which absolutely nobody asked you
to bring but I guess this is what you
car around with
[Laughter]
you Stephen this is a femur a femur a
femur yeah this is a human femur um and
I guess a femur is the it's the bone
that connects your pelvis yeah to your
knee oh okay so it's that big bone in my
leg the big bone it's the longest bone
in your body this bone you brought with
you um a lot of people talk about joint
pain yes is joint pain inevitable I'll
give it to you because you probably know
more about this stuff than I do so what
is a joint a joint is the is the space
that's occupied by two bones so the
femur the top of it that's in your hip
is a ball and it sits in a cup in your
in your pelvis so two different Bones
the pelvis is connected to the femur
through the hip joint it goes like this
right so and then on this end this end
of the femur is connected to your tibia
and it makes your knee right okay yep so
uh is joint pain inevitable it is not do
we get it with aging often so that you
would think it's inevitable but it is
not inevitable why do we get joint pain
well every bone at the end is covered in
an endcap of a structure called
cartilage cartilage is a smoother than
ice
Matrix that cushions the bone so that
you don't feel your joints one reason
people have pain is because they've
traumatically disrupted that cartilage
and there's potholes in it like if
you're a football player and you get hit
hard and a piece it impacts so hard it
pops off that's a traumatic cartilage
injury you will have joint pain from
that another reason reason we can have
joint pain is not traumatic cartilage
loss but because you've just done so
many reps over a lifetime that you've
worn it down that's called
osteoarthritis and so it's not a pothole
per se it's like the whole surface has
been worn down with sandpaper for
instance and there's just not enough of
it well the reason we get osteoarthritis
some of it's genetic but much of it is
how much we weigh sometimes that's
related especially in women to whether
or not we have
estrogen um we only get one set of
cartilage for a lifetime unless I
reconstruct your cartilage because
you've been injured or something uh we
get one set so we get joint pain because
the cartilage has started to wear down
we can get joint pain because we've
worked really hard in a workout and
we've just seen a lot of impact and it
inflames your joint but that's usually
temporary the permanent permanent is
usually do to ostearthritis so so how do
I if I want to work out and I want to
make sure that I protect my joints so
that I don't have this um permanent sort
of naturally irreversible joint pain
yeah is there certain workouts that I
should be
avoiding are there certain workouts that
are more likely to give me to erode my
cartilage and give me joint pain well I
think principles that should be used are
the principles of weightlifting with
Progressive overload so if you started
out cold and decided you know I'm young
I'm healthy I'm just gonna uh lift to my
maximum all the time you're probably
going to inflame your joint your joint
is not used to seeing that kinds of load
joints bear 5 to 10 times body weight so
if you've gone from zero to 500 lb squat
that is 5,000 PBS yeah that's a lot
versus if you start from zero and
progressively up your body will get used
to the load your bones will build your
uh your cartilage won't grow but it will
become more used to the pressure so the
principle is um to not have aching
joints is progressively go up and not
just let your ego take over so you're
saying that muscle helps to kind of as a
suspension mechanism for the cartilage
well what things project protect the
joints uh being of a healthy body
composition which includes weight and
muscle mass right so the way muscle
helps protect the joints is exactly if
you said instead of pounding together
like this yeah muscle acts as a shock
absorber so the the bones come together
more softly oh okay so for people with
osteoarthritis one of the remedies for
that is building muscle oh I've got um
you mentioned a second ago that staying
at a decent weight also helps to Stave
off joint pains and that sort of erosion
of cartilage and I was I was reading in
your work about this pretty shocking um
grab my my brick and my rock this pretty
shocking stat yeah that God this is
heavy you can take that okay I'm
put
um in your work you describe how putting
on even a small amount of weight
increases the pressure on our joints by
a huge amount so can you explain that
using this y so when we think about
pressure across our joint we were we're
thinking about whether we gain weight or
lose weight The Joint which in this bone
is a femur the femur the end of the
femur is sitting against the tibia and
that's what makes your knee joint when
you go up and down the stairs and have
pain in your knee what's happening there
well if you gain one pound this rock is
one pound you would think that this is
all the amount of pressure you're going
to feel but because of the mechanics the
physics of the long bones the pressure
of gravity pushing up on you what you
actually feel is the weight of these
bricks which is N9 lb so gaining one
pound in weight one pound in weight
exerts nine times the pressure on your
joint so you think gaining 10 pounds
doesn't mean much but imagine gting 100
pound of pressure or the reverse of that
is even small changes in our total body
weight one pound 10 lbs can have
profound effects on the joint pain we
feel so if I lose one pound I'm taking n
pound taking this away h
uh what some research shows that if you
lose 10% of your body weight you can
make a profound difference in uh the
pressure your joint experiences and
decrease your pain so when I prescribe
treatment for arthritis here's the whole
person whole person approach if I just
wanted to say okay you've got arthritis
I'm going to give you an injection and
sign you up for surgery that might be a
typical surgical approach but my
Approach is we look at your nutrition we
talk about an anti-inflammatory
nutrition enough protein uh not eating
sugar sugar is a huge inflammatory which
increases your arthritis pain we talk
about building muscle so that we have
more shock absorption we talk about
losing absolute amount of body weight so
that we unload the joint in another way
even before we get to any medical type
treatment it's the lifestyle approaches
that you can use I would have thought
that if I'd put on one pound of weight I
would put one pound of pressure on my
joints but what you're saying is if I
put on one pound of weight I'm actually
putting nine pounds of pressure on my
joints yes you know it has to do with
the Across The Joint the physics of the
lever arms of our bone so for instance
in our shoulder if you put one pound in
your hand the pressure felt in your arm
because of this long lever arm to lift
it is is 10 times so I always tell my
patients who are recovering don't feel
discouraged when you lift up the two-b
weight it's 20 pounds on your shoulder
it has to do with the the physics of
pulling the weight up in the axial load
it has to do with the gravity and the
impact of Bones one on another you talk
about these three M major mindset
changes that we need to kind of um
experience in order to make sure that we
can be fit and healthy in our late years
things like not focusing on weight loss
but instead focusing on building muscle
that for me is um again it's a bit of a
a narrative violation because um I think
as we age one of the things that we see
as being in inevitable is that we are
going to gain weight so most people go
to war with just trying to lose
specifically abdominal fat I think a lot
of men are really quite obsessed with
their abdominal fat why why do we need
to make that mindset shift you know what
and I'll take that shift even further
and it's I like to frame it as we don't
want to lose weight we want to uh
recompose what are we made of right we
want to be made of healthy muscle we we
want to care about how much body
what percentage of our body is fat we
need fat fat has a purpose in our body
or we wouldn't have it but what
percentage our muscle so what happens
when we just focus on losing weight and
our primary method is calorie
restriction what we know it is clear
from from many papers that if we just
calorie restrict with nothing else we
will lose 25 to 50% of our weight as
muscle and then that makes us
metabolically less healthy because
muscle is a glucose sink you know when
we feed ourselves and there's sugar
circulating it is taken up by our muscle
with if we lose 25 to 50% as we lose
weight we have less metabolic
availability to get rid of all that and
then when we come off our crazy calorie
restrict diet the weight we gain back is
80% fat so if we are if we're troubled
with yo-yo diets which so many people
struggle with that they'll lose weight
they'll gain weight they'll lose weight
it becomes this circle as we're
continuously losing more muscle so when
I frame it for men and women I want them
to to think of
recomposing how as I'm losing fat
percentage can I gain muscle and so that
puts it in a different perspective I
don't care what you weigh you know I'm a
muscly woman I weigh more probably than
people would think I would because I
have lower body fat I have higher muscle
content and that's what we care about
and for people I always chuckle when I
say this that are really interested in
the way clothes fit which I am I'm as
vain as they come well muscle is
Nature's Spanx you may weigh more but
you're Tighter and everything fits and
looks better so it's not weight it's
composition can we
be
as in shape as we were when we were 25
when we're 45 we can be different
different there are lots and lots of
examples all over of uh either people
staying healthy I mean look at Tom Brady
he's a great example right Cristiano
Ronaldo is a great example my God I just
saw him the other day uh playing
actually in this Europe tournament I
just saw him playing um there are lots
of examples of that from Pro Sports now
but even in mere mortal athletes they're
posting all over the Internet how they
have maintained or many people a light
bulb turns off and they say I'm as I'm
sitting on my rear end I'm as strong
today as if I'm ever going to be unless
I do something and we have pictures of
people investing in weightlifting and
high protein meals and and getting in
better shape than they ever were I was
in the best shape of my life when I was
40 and then I went through per menopause
and thought I was going to die and now
I'm 57 I'm in some of the best shape of
my life I am
not I'm not 19% body fat like I was when
I was 40 but as a whole person this is
the best it's ever been it's really
interesting as a football fan a soccer
fan um I know it is called football as a
football fan seeing how two different
players at the same age I'm thinking
about I won't name names because it
makes it personal but someone like
Cristiano Ronaldo and I compare him to
another player from my Club Manchester
United he Cristiano played there at one
point um who is also 41 years old
whatever Cristiano is now and they
look 15 20 years apart Cristiano Ronaldo
carried on playing he by all accounts
from things that I hear at Manchester
United has the most discipline with his
routine his nutrition and then another
player who at the time when they both
played together in their 30s they kind
of looked the same physically yes but
just because for some reason they let go
it almost appears that they let go they
got on the alcohol a little bit their
diet shifted they now look like they're
15 years older than Cristiano but at 35
they kind of look the same they both had
abs and it's so crazy how just a couple
of years of just kind of forgetting
about these simple disciplines can send
your perceived trajectory of your health
so widely apart whereas Cristiano he
literally looks like when he saw him he
did he did a penalty kick yeah I'll put
a photo of of him the physique he's in
up on the screen cuz whoop who are
sponsor sponsor of this podcast they
went out recently to Saudi Arabia I
believe where he's playing and they did
a topless pide interview with him and I
was like Jesus my God look at that and I
compare him to the his colleagues and I
content to you though that that
colleague yeah because he's still in his
40s if they put the time back in yeah
could become ripped again um the the
basics there that I need to think about
in order to be a Cristiano Ronaldo as
opposed to another one of his colleagues
that didn't manage to stay in shape yes
what are those fundamentals that you
think Cristiano is hitting or from your
work with athletes yeah I think that
um I think we harness the power of our
age the wisdom of our age so he probably
works out now differently than he did
when he was 25 he he probably and I
don't know his routine but people like
Dara Torres or uh Michael Phelps they
spend more time on recovery more time on
muscle work they're very systematic
about their workouts they do Max men
they get the maximum workout in their
skill set their skill workouts they're
not out on the field for four hours
anymore they get an hour and a half in
they work on the skills they need to do
so they're smarter right number two uh
nutrition is monitored from literally
when uh one of my jobs at the University
of Pittsburgh was as the medical
director of the UPMC Lemieux Sports
Complex we house the Penguins the
Pittsburgh Penguins which is the
professional hockey
team they had a full-time chef from the
minute they woke up they came in for
breakfast lunch was cooked all snacks
were provided even the food on the
airplanes was provided so that they had
this very regimented diet full of the
nutrition they needed not only to fuel
them but to recover them so that's
nutrition nothing is a mistake uh number
three they are their workouts are not
only on the skilled workouts but the
conditioning workouts are completely
monitored I mean you're sponsored by
whoop whoop takes care of a lot of
athletes we know know their recovery
State we know how well they slept the
night before we know their response to
the heavy lifting so I think that
athletes at that level are able to
maintain the way they are because it's a
science also frankly they're genetically
specimens they got this great cytoplasm
they were born with
sugar you don't speak very funly of it
I've read a quote where you say it will
destroy your body on so many levels it
does so you know what I love sugar I you
know I love sugar I would rather eat
cookies for breakfast but I don't and
and the first time I sugar detoxed after
the first three days it was rough
because you know sugar is addictive
there's an addictive Center in our brain
you know and so after three days you can
gut it out and use your willpower
discipline but after 3 days the fourth
day you're going to your cupboard and
you're standing there and you're like I
don't know why I'm here well it's your
brain looking for a dopamine hit of
sugar so what does sugar
do I am not opposed to carbs our body
needs carbs it doesn't need as much as
we get but we need fiber filled carbs
fiber is critical in our bodies what we
don't need is beet and sugar cane and
honey and Agave all the simple sugars
that have a a steep glycemic index
meaning you eat
it it's easily digested rapidly digested
goes immediately to your blood your
blood sugar will Spike give you some
examples and
then what happens is our pancreas will
release insulin which will frantically
try to carry it into our muscles to be
used well that happens at a finite rate
and when you have too much sugar
circulating that overcomes the rate that
it can be removed D our body stores it
in fat right with a high blood glucose
our body goes through a circumstance
called uh glycosilation which is
essentially caramelizing proteins in
your body it's like you have a steak and
you leave it on the grill extra long and
it gets that caramelized well that state
of our proteins in our body is highly
inflammatory well we know High
inflammation is something that
contributes to chronic disease it contri
this excessive blood sugar contributes
to insulin insensitivity meaning our wh
pancreas is trying to pop out enough
insulin to get rid of the sugar that it
pops out so much that we become
insensitive to it there's just an
overabundance so all of those reasons
are why I am not opposed to complex
carbs and fiber I am opposed to the
highly processed sugar fill diet that
is produced for us by our current food
system and by the choices we make I
don't blame society I don't blame our
food system I blame them and the choices
we make um so I that's one of the first
things I recommend to my patients do you
know it's the hardest thing for them to
give up and they'll do everything else
they'll get to a gym they'll they'll do
aerobics the way I want them too but
then when I say and we need to eliminate
simple sugar that's when excuses come
out it's interesting because yeah I mean
it's difficult there's obviously a
physiological sort of chemical hold that
sugar has over over us but on this point
of psychology and uh willpower or
whatever we want to call it everything
that we've discussed so far today is
kind of contingent on you making a
decision yes now how when you talk about
the whole human how can you influence
someone who might have got this far in
the conversation today and they they
understand everything you've said they
go yeah I know that stuff I know this
thing here and you I've heard that over
in this book or this podcast before but
for some reason I just can't can't do it
can't do it can't get myself to do it
maybe I'll do it for one day but then
the yo-yo goes back to the bottom and
there's this concept in banking called
temporal disconnect it's a banking term
I Came Upon it as I was writing these
books initially and the concept is that
Bankers Financial people want us to put
a little bit away every day not for
today there's no satisfaction in that
for today in fact it's deprivation for
today but it's for the future the
concept of temporal disconnect is that
you don't know who you're going to be in
30 years you're or 40 years a
70-year-old step you don't know that guy
you don't care about that guy you don't
even know what he's like what he's going
to become so but you do know today
Stephen and so you're going to take care
of this guy not that guy and so that's
why Bankers can't get us to invest our
money in the general population right
most people don't have much savings
right the same is true when we apply it
to our health what do we want now what's
going to make me feel good now what you
know can I bargain with myself that I'll
do it tomorrow or this little bite's not
going to hurt me right because the
temporal disconnect of at 63 if I don't
do something
now I'm going to have chronic disease
rare its ugly head that is a hard
argument some people are disciplined
enough to think like that that's a hard
one so some of the ways to help people
now is to help them identify how amazing
they're going to feel now in instead of
feeling sluggish sitting in a chair all
day with back pain if we invest every
day in Walking In Sprint intervals which
is going to make us lose fat or lifting
heavy which is going to put on the
muscle of Spanx and make us look good
and plus when you get done lifting heavy
you feel like a badass right if you can
make that the reward that is an easier
thing to do because you are right we
know what to do we just don't do it and
we know what to do and we don't do it
because the battle is in the five and a
half inches between our ears it's not
actually picking up the barbell right
and so it's identifying how this is
going to make me feel today not for 20
years and here's the other thing I
honestly think sometimes it comes down
to
selfworth do I believe that I am worth
the daily investment in my health or do
I believe that everything else is more
important than me and that's
hard and I have come to understand that
until you believe that you are worth the
daily investment in your health Nothing
Else Matters yeah it's so interesting
and I think one of the things again that
has been um cured that used to be a mind
virus of mine was I think part of me did
think when I get to 50 when I get to 60
I'll address it then yeah I if I've got
um certain um health issues when I'm 60
well I'll just go to the gym then and
I'll just uh yeah I'll just fix it then
I'll just start becoming uh active when
I'm 50 or 60 but I but that's not how
any part of my life works that's not how
my business or my investing Works
everything is compounding now yeah so
the decisions I make at 20 or 25 or 30
or your daughter's upstairs she's what
she she's young she 16 the choices I
start making then are sewing seeds that
will flourish For Better or For Worse
when I'm 60 70 and you know it's easier
than doing a little bit every day that's
easy you know my daughter upstairs she
poor thing can't get away from knowing
what the right choices are it doesn't
mean that she do always does them but if
she maintains this healthy lifestyle she
has because she lives in our house it'll
be easy every day it's a lifesty style
right it's not a
Monumental pivot it's just the way she
lives and you know the same if if you do
all the things that you know to do now
it will become just the way you live
it's not a high energy expenditure
versus waiting until you're 50 when
you're 50 PBS overweight when you have
to totally rebuild all your lean muscle
mass you know you're feeling like a
whatever you're going to feel like
that's a big pivot versus I'm just
living another day doing the things I've
always done this is who I
am I am yeah that's one of the things
that's been really helped me I think
from doing this podcast is obviously I'm
inundated with lots of information about
health so the framework I use to decide
what to take in and what to implement is
just I I hear some things that my guests
say and they might say oh by the way
Stephen um apple juice or orange juice
is full of sugar and in my head I was
going oh my God I thought was healthy
and then and I don't really I could take
it or leave it anyway so these small
sort of modifications taking these sort
of very sugary Jinks out of my life as
something that happened um being
consistent with my workouts focusing on
muscle gain thinking a lot about how I
sit but also making sure I'm as active
as I can be um and then the other thing
actually has been supplements yes
because I sit in this di of Co Studio a
lot and I sit in Dragon STS little
dungeon a lot I spend a lot of time sat
at my desk inside without any sort of
natural light so I've started taking
Vitamin D supplements frequently because
actually I went to the doctors did my my
tests and how low was it how low was it
it was very low they said everything's
fine Steve you're' all good here here
and here I did like the full body I did
my testicles to my toes to everything my
blood everything my moles whatever it
might be and the the one thing he did
say to me is your vitamin D levels are
low so I've started supplementing is is
how crucial is vitamin D for healthy I
mean you know what it's a it's a hormone
that affects so many organ systems it's
important for your bones it's important
for your immune system it's important
for your brain so it's something that
everyone should supplement they should
get their level checked we're all low
and then we should supplement up and
then have it recheck so that you can
have a maintenance Lo dose you usually
take it with potassium to help
absorption magnesium is a is another key
player with vitamin D what if I want
really strong bones what should I be
taking uh vitamin D potassium magnesium
you should be eating
uh one gram of protein for every lean
for every ideal body pound you have so
you build muscle to um to help your
bones you know there's some remote data
on Boron and zinc but I'd rather you
have the three that we know work to
build strong bones you not only need
muscle you need proper nutrition you
need
to I should find another term but you
need to bash your bones you need to
impact your bones the mechanical stress
of impacting bones whether it's jumping
up and down running going up and down
the stairs for people with poor bone
density you can use a reformer which is
a which is a a
trampoline um is all important for
sending the biomechanical signals to
your bone that you're doing work you
need stronger bones that is transformed
into a biochemical signal that makes
your
bones uh that your bone cells lay down
new bone that's how you
keep healthy bones across a lifespan can
you grow new bone um you
can yes you can actually you can can
increase your t- score it's a
multifactorial t- score is a score that
we measure using a test called a dexa
scan uh a dexa scan will tell us not
only our absolute bone density but but
compare us to healthy people and this
dexa scans are usually used for women or
older men who have fallen in fra ured
but a t-core tells us what our bone
density is compared to a healthy
30-year-old right assuming a 30-year-old
has laid down optimal amounts of bone
and we can talk about how that's
becoming not true but so once we know
our
t-core it tells us the health of our
bones
um just to give us a gauge of can we
rebuild so yes all the things we can
lift weights we can impact our bones we
can have proper nutrition if we are a
woman and uh have lost our estrogen
which starts in our 40s not our 50s it
starts in our 40s we can make our
estrogen decision as I know you've
talked about before uh because estrogen
and testosterone are critical in bone
health and then if you show up with a
t-core that shows that you have Frank
osteoporosis even two million men in the
United States have osteoporosis it's
it's us osteoporosis is uh critical bone
density uh weakness meaning a t-core of
minus 2.5 so if you this is how it goes
so remember in the in the tests in lower
school where they would grade you on
this bell
curve straight up the middle is bone
density at 30 and a healthy woman for
instance zero any positive number for
for your t-core your bone density is
more than zero perfect you're all good
bone density one standard deviation or
minus one below a 30-year-old healthy
woman is called osteopenia meaning your
bone density is getting low we really
got to step up our efforts a bone
density number A t-core minus 2.5 is the
definition of Frank osteoporosis which
is Bones dangerously
brittle that
score plus there's this index called a
fra index of R ax index which takes all
your lifestyle risk
meaning is your mother shrinking do you
have a family history of osteoporosis
did you already fracture fracture is the
number one uh predictor of future
fracture did you smoke your whole life
did you have an illness where you had to
take a lot of steroids that predispose
that break down bones are you of genetic
makeup where you're predisposed to bone
density the fra index takes all those
and calculates your risk for having a
fracture in the next 10 years so a
t-core of minus 2.5 and a fra index of
3.6 or three meaning I have a 3% chance
of a fracture in the next 10 years those
are indications for employing some of
the
pharmacologic uh drugs to either
maintain bones or to to build bones and
there's a few categories of those that I
usually send people to an
endocrinologist to weed out it's kind of
a complex decision if I was if I was
getting to that stage what kind of
things would you tell me that I needed
to do so if I was getting to the stage
where I was minus two on that scale if
you were already a minus 2.5 we would
have a long hard discussion about all
the lifestyle interventions nutrition
lifting you can still lift uh how we're
going to add Mobility uh impact how
we're going to get some impact in
without breaking a bone but we're also
going to have a conversation about our
hormone status um and we're also going
to if you're already that low have a
conversation about whether we use a
pharmacologic augment like
bisphosphonate or forteo or some of the
drugs that are available to support bone
density and each person man or woman has
to have their individual risks assessed
to know which road to go down but what
we cannot do is we cannot ignore it and
hope that it goes
away You' you've done um so many studies
and I find studies really fascinating
because they're they're first first
party in that regard so it's really
finding things out for the first time
what is your what are some of those
studies that we haven't discussed that
relate to our conversation today that
you find most interesting yeah so let's
talk about we'll start with bone because
we're just talking about in Master's
athletes we did two studies looking at
could we Preserve Reserve bone density
across a lifespan if we took the
variable of sedentary living out of the
equation so in the first studies that we
my group did uh I we formed a group
called Prima the performance and
research Initiative for Master's
athletes we looked at 3,000 Master's
athletes you had to be 50 years old uh
and uh they were competing in the
National senior games which is uh like
Olympics for people over 50
and these weren't just these weren't
just everybody that could go these were
the people who had qualified in their
state games to go to the National games
so we looked at 3,000 of them we did two
bone studies we found the first question
asked could we maintain bone density
across upper age limits because we were
active and what we found was that yes a
very high percentage of people up even
up into 85 had normal T scores but then
we did a second study that we wanted to
ask okay so of all the activities you
could do what would make the biggest
response from your
bone and not surprisingly we found that
impact exercise the running Sports the
volleyball the the basketball
Sports versus the swimming the biking
the bowling for instance there's bowling
in Senior Olympics um those with sports
where you impact your
bone that impact exercise was as
predictive of bone density as things you
can't control like your age your sex
your genetics and so it just shows how
important putting mechanical stimulus
against your bone is so that was really
important so even bones can be preserved
we've already talked about the muscle
preservation study which was fascinating
the very first question I asked was to
answer the question
this is this virus in your
brain when do we really slow down when
can we say oh I'm just getting old I'm
gon to slow
down I based on the athletes I saw I
knew that it wasn't
50 so I studied 3,000 of these athletes
again I looked at all the track and
field athletes I looked at athletes in
the 100 meter all the way up to the
10,000 m so all distances Sprints versus
long distance I looked at Finish times
of the top eight finishers in every age
category and here's what I found to
answer the question when do we
significantly slow down it's not 50 it's
not 60 it is not until our mid 70s when
we significantly slow down if we use
athletic performance as a biomarker of
Aging so what does that mean the example
is this if you put a bunch of men in a
one M
race the 50-year-old man in the year I
did the study finished that one mile
race in 5 minutes and 34 seconds to put
that in perspective the boy that won the
Pennsylvania State high school games won
his Mile in 5 17 oh wow I know 20
seconds and in in 30 40 years right how
old was he 17 let's say he was 17 uh but
the 50-year old winner did in 434 the
70-year-old winner of that mile race did
it in seven minutes so nobody was
getting lapped right so I used those
times to see how much we slow down
before age 70 we slow down less than
1.2% a
year timing wise so after 70 there is a
rapid decline in times or you get slower
and slower and slower and I call that
biology taking over either you don't
have the mindset to work that hard
anymore or you've got enough injuries
that you can't work that hard anymore or
you've lost enough lean muscle mass or
or bone flexibility but what it tells us
is that we have no excuse until our
mid-70s for slowing down if we invest
every day in our Mobility so it really
set the stage that was my first study
really set the stage for wanting to find
out okay what's our muscle doing
what is our bone doing the third study
we did which took us five years because
we matched for
everything and now it's common knowledge
but at the time it wasn't we asked the
question well if we take sedentary
living away from our brain what happens
and so we had the athlete group and we
had a control group that was matched for
every variable except their activity
level and what we found was that people
who were chronically active maintained
their uh mental agility and their speed
of decision making and their uh physical
aspects of something called the sf12
which is your perception of your
physical prowess were all higher if you
invested in your Mobility every day so
even our brains are responsive and and
we know that now there's lots of studies
it's a it's something that's talked
about a
lot the final interest
group of studies that we did before I
left University of Pittsburgh was to
start asking the questions of why what's
going on here why well there's this
protein called clo clo was uh one of the
Greek gods who spun the threat of life
so this protein when it was discovered
was thought to play a role in longevity
every organ has receptors for clo we
know that mice that are genetically
engineered to not be able to make
clo die
old very young they're chronologically
very very young mice but they're
physiologically very old because they
lack this protein so I decided to
measure clo and my athletes and compare
them to sedentary people so we drew
their blood we ran the Elisa study and
and not surprisingly
youngish 35 to 50 year old Master's
athletes had the highest level of
circulating clo longevity
protein the second highest level of cloo
in our study were people over 75 who
were still athletes do you know the who
the lowest clo level was sedentary
30-year-olds so if clo is the longevity
protein and exercising people have the
highest levels the next question was
okay so what's going on how does
exercise give us more long vity
protein well one of my one of my
colleagues Dr fabric Ambrosio did the
study that showed that contraction of
skeletal
muscle stimulates the transcription or
the making of the Clos protein so it's
our body's response to the stimulus of
activity that makes us make more
longevity protein because our bodies
believe that we are reinvesting in
ourselves and not just sit sitting in a
chair waiting to die but that's
fascinating right interesting you I I
read about study you did as well with
rats and stem cells which is seems
somewhat linked to this idea of muscular
yes I'm glad you brought it up so it's
the so remember that picture we talked
about that at a tissue level that we can
maintain our muscle mass so that's at a
tissue level the whole flank stake we
can maintain we wanted to see well
what's happening at a cellular level
what's happening at a stem cell level
and so we we had a bunch of old lady
mice they were mice oh mice mice when
you're old you're two years old that is
a long lifespan for a mouse these little
old lady mice were sitting back in the
back of their cages just hanging out
waiting for their next food and we
sampled a little bit of their muscle
because the lab that I was a part of
looked at a kind of muscle derived stem
cell meaning all of our tissues have
stem cells in them including muscle
and and we now know those cells as
satellite cells at the time in the in
the early 2000s we called them muscle
Drive stem cells but we took them and
what do we find these little old stem
cells healthy stem cells around these
stem cells had started to become all
spindly like tree
branches they were no longer pumping out
growth factor meaning they were not
reproductively healthy they were not
doing what they were supposed to do and
do these stem cells make Muscle these
are stem stem cells that are found in
muscle and when stimulated produce
muscle okay and so they were not
dividing because they were all spindly
they were not producing growth factor
and death in cells is an active process
they had turned on the genes that were
leading to cell death so we took those
little old lady mice and believe it or
not you can buy treadmills for mice do
you know how much a mouse treadmill
costs no $30,000 you're joking I'm not
it was like a big part of my whole Grant
so we bought this treadmill we put the
little old lady mice on here's what we
found in two weeks twice a day many
workouts their stem cells were fat and
replicating again they were churning out
growth factor and they had turned off
the pr programming for program cell
death so what that told us is that even
at the stem cell level that we can
rejuvenate stem cells by something as
simple as skeletal muscle contraction
and so to me that is a fountain of youth
type
intervention at the cellular
level someone said to me on this podcast
one day I'm probably going to butcher it
but they said aging is the rapid pursuit
of
comfort and I and as you were saying
that I was thinking oh that's that kind
of fits that much of our aging uh is
just to do with our increased pursue
suit of comfort for whatever reason M um
I was thinking about that this morning
when we're thinking about I was thinking
about you know what is the what is the
minimum amount of time we have to work
out to what is the min max and I thought
well honestly you can probably
accomplish what min max is in about 45
minutes a day so what are we doing with
our other more than 90% of the time and
it goes kind of goes to this what are we
doing are we pursuing pleasure all day
well we're working
but once we're not working what's the
rest of that we're just sitting around
being pleasureful all day and so that's
an interesting question but another way
to motivate people uh is to start
associating taking care of ourselves as
pleasure and not or comfort and not just
in the senses I'm going to get a massage
or a facial which is what often we think
of self-care but that's temporary right
it just lasts an hour until you I often
think that I get off a massage but I'm
like okay that was good but what do I
have to do this every day yeah so you
start thinking of taking care of
yourself as as pleasure putting yourself
in discomfort temporary discomfort
because I'm not really kidding you and
you're probably the same when you churn
out an upper body workout and your
muscles are full of blood and you're
looking in the mirror because I know you
do we all do and you're like that is a
good result today that's pleasureful and
if we if we stop for a moment and notice
how good we feel afterwards uh it's a
motivation for how much we don't want to
get there because I don't want to get
there as much as the next person doesn't
want to get there to the
gym if you're a beat to be marketeer
then you want to stick around for the
next 30 seconds or so as a businessto
business marketeer you'll know how tough
it is to explain what you do I've been
there too but there's a platform that
gets us and that's LinkedIn I'm happy to
say sponsor this podcast imagine a place
where you can connect with professionals
who truly understand your world that is
LinkedIn ads LinkedIn ads helps you to
build a meaningful relationships and
drive results in a respectful
environment with over a billion members
including 130 million senior level
Executives and 10 million C- level
Executives you can Target your audience
precisely by job title industry and much
more LinkedIn members are always
updating their profiles so your
targeting stays fresh and relevant it's
no surprise that LinkedIn is the highest
risk returning paid social platform and
Linkedin ads have kindly offered all of
you a $100 credit to launch your first
campaign and start reaching the right
people go to linkedin.com
doac
c24 to claim your credit terms and
conditions apply you have written a
paper about a subject we haven't spoke
about much yet you mentioned it briefly
from your own experience you talked
about going into Perry menopause and
thinking you're going to die yeah
there's been a lot of research that's
come out and you've done a lot of work
on how menopause imp impacts our
muscular skeletal yes physiolog
physiology I guess is the word what what
do women that are and men that have a
partner or a friend or a mother or
whatever it might be need to know about
how menopause impacts our muscular
skeletal functioning yes so I think uh
it is very common for people to know
about hot flashes brain fog night sweats
what is less commonly known is that 80%
of all women going through paring
menopause will experience what the term
we've coined the musculoskeletal
syndrome of menopause we coin that after
the gyneco urinary syndrome of menopause
which is five or six different things
put into one category so we can talk
about it more easily so in the
musculoskeletal syndrome of menopause we
know that 80% of women will experience
it 25% of women will be devastated by it
and 40% of the time when you go to the
doctor and they do duee diligence and
they work up they send you for Imaging
nothing will be found structurally so
that's why women sometimes think oh my
God I'm just old I'm falling apart and
am I going crazy because my doctor's
telling me there's nothing structurally
wrong but that's why we created this
nomenclature so that women would realize
that ubiquitous on every musculoskeletal
tissue are receptors for estrogen just
like in the brain just like in you know
every other body part the muscle
musculoskeletal system muscle tendon
bone atap POS the inflammatory aspects
are responsive to estrogen sitting in
these receptors so what are the things
in the muscular scal syndrome of
menopause well number one is
inflammation in estrogen is a huge
anti-inflammatory it prevents the
release of a cyto Kind inflammatory cyto
kind called torosis factor and menopause
just to be clear is the part part part
of the symptoms is the loss of estrogen
so if we if we just clarify the timeline
so uh a woman's hormones are unlike men
men once you're through puberty your
testosterone will stay pretty steady
women every month as we go through a
menstrual stri cycle estrogen goes up
and down when we in around these are
average times around 45 it can start
early like 35 but around 45 we have used
up enough eggs from our week our monthly
cycle that we start to become low in our
estrogen and our body is trying to
adjust to that our brain without
estrogen gets brain fog it has a lot of
receptors and nothing to go in them
right once we have used up all of our
eggs and we are one year from our last
menstrual cycle 366 days that is the
one- day definition of
menopause and we live the rest of our 40
40 more years we live postmenopause
without estrogen unless we supplement so
in per menopause in our 40s that's why I
say at 47 I thought it was going to die
as estrogen is going away all these
receptors that used to be filled with
estrogen which would then cause all
these marvelous Downstream effects all
the muscle protein synthesis the bone
laying down the inflammation would be
kept at Bay suddenly have have no
stimulus so when we're talking about
inflammation estrogen is an
anti-inflammatory effect it prevents the
release of tum necrosis factor which is
a inflammatory cyto kind I think of it
like a fire or you know nuclear war
something that chemicals in our body um
so that gets out of control and then uh
estrogen is also really important
interacting with a part of our immune
system called the inflam Amon so without
estrogen controlling inflammation we can
get something called arthralgia which is
your total body hurts for no reason and
this was one of my primary symptoms when
I was 47 I went from being an athlete
active all the time surgeon I do hauling
people's bodies around to I could barely
get out of bed it took me a lot to like
crank out and get out of bed my whole
body hurt there's nothing structurally
wrong it's do the inflam inflammation of
loss of estrogen another very very very
common inflammat symptom of the
musculoskeletal syndrome of menopause is
frozen shoulder it's all over social
media right now it's where it is an
inflammatory State men can get it
usually diabetic men it just means that
you're you're inflamed so you'll present
to my office with the story of doc I did
nothing I didn't have an accident I
didn't hit my shoulder on the closet in
the middle of the night when it was dark
but I woke up my shoulder is killing me
and I can't move it it's it's literally
like this and that's because for some
reason the shoulder is very sensitive
the capsule the inside skin of the
shoulder very sensitive to inflammation
and so people show up like that frozen
shoulder can take two years to get rid
of it's miserable so that's
inflammation is that the the whole hook
your bra tested yes yes I made this
thing up you can't hook your bra right
most women do this yeah the first motion
you lose in Frozen shoulder is internal
rotation which is what this is hooking
your bra on hooking your bra you can't
cuz what happens is the first thing that
goes you can't do this your arm's kind
of stuck at your
side and then you can't lift it up and
you can't do your hair so you're trying
you know you're doing all this trying to
imagine not being able to move your arm
and when you did move your arm it's
excruciating oh it's painful as well
excruciating pain like women say to me
I'd rather give birth again than have
this shoulder so what's going on now
like what's going on in the shoulder
yeah there's uh there was a study done
by Joe hannahan who is a mentor of mine
at at hospital for special surgery who
looked at the stages of of frozen
shoulder and first it's just big
inflammation all the inflammatory cyto
kindes go and inhabit the I keep doing
this the shoulder has an inside skin
that surrounds the Bones called the
capsule it's like a a thin sheet of
paper like cellophane that gets inflamed
hot and red that's
painful over time
the inflammatory cells of the immune
system that crawl into the capsule the
pain will go away but it will cause a a
capsular shrinkage like this the it will
actually contract so your pain your
shoulder might not be as painful but it
still won't move so that's why it's
really critical that people come to
doctors like me and we get it moving
quickly we do not want it to become
stocked in because it literally can take
two years to defrost all due to this
inflam at and we don't know why the
capsule is so sensitive but we know it
is so that's the inflammatory aspect of
this we know that without
estrogen uh we can lose uh two to 3% of
our um muscle mass and rapidly during
this period we have estrogen is an
anabolic steroid it it's made for muscle
building through the mtor system and so
without that and we build less muscle
and our muscle stem cells our satellite
cells become decreased by 30 to 60% it's
profound in a very short amount of
time we know our bone about bone density
we talked about that estrogen's role in
the bone is to control one of the cells
called the osteoclast if we talk about
bone biology briefly if we have that
femur imagine on one side of the cell
when uh you impact your bone the bi
mechanical stimulus is converted to
biomecha biochemical stimulus and it
says hey uh we need to build more bone
so the
osteoclast crawls up the cell and starts
digging out minerals to release to the
body to do its
function what happens when you have
estrogen is the osteoblast comes back up
behind it and fills in that hole and
builds
bone
estrogen helps control osteoclasts the
more I learn about bone biology after
all these years it seems to me that the
osteoclast is a little bit of a rogue
entity it's going to go uncontrolled it
needs a lot of a lot of control with
estrogen testosterone without those
controls what happens in osteoporosis is
you you can still lay down bone your
osteoblasts are still working but it's
out of control you're breaking down more
bone than You're Building okay yep so
you know inflammation you have muscle
you have bone here's one we talked about
arthritis
earlier there are estrogen receptors on
the cartilage cartil estrogen sitting on
the cartilage helps maintain this spongy
M spongy Matrix of cartilage that then
protects your bones without estrogen the
cartilage Matrix breaks down so before
50 men have more traumatic arthritis
than women after 50 women can have a
rapid progression of their arthritis
pile on top of that the weight gain that
happens to many women with the load we
talked about and it's a disaster and so
many women rapidly progress and need
total joints which as an orthopedic
surgeon is not the end all but we'd like
to avoid it right so that's due to
estrogen being missing from the
cartilage and then finally on that point
talked about weight gain there in
menopause I I read that you you gained
weight when you went through menopause I
gained 30 lb 30b so that's equivalent to
four roughly four of these bricks if
each brick weighs um 7 and a half pounds
which is a lot of weight to suddenly
gain and when we think about the impact
that that will have on your joints based
on what you said earlier yeah yeah my
pain was more an arthralgic pain meaning
total body pain although when I had that
weight on
I had um knee I had pain underneath my
kneecaps going up and downstairs because
of the extra pressure of the my kneecaps
on my
femurs so does that make sense yes it
does yeah that's uh yeah something that
we don't I don't think I never really
considered I never considered how the
impact on our joints of weight gain
period but then also when you go through
menopause weight gain is something that
I've heard about over and over and over
and over again because of the loss of
estrogen um and how that will then have
a skeletal impact on a variety of
different areas of your body but then
imagine this perfect storm right you you
don't feel like yourself you're tired
you your joints hurt maybe your whole
body hurts you're losing your muscle so
that causes more impact there's no shock
absorption you're losing your bone and
without even realizing what's happening
because it creeps up on you right and
you're so busy I mean all the excuses
are so busy
women very rapidly find themselves at 60
and they have you know there's a
syndrome called
Oso
osteoporotic meaning bad bones we talked
about that sarob
obesity loss of bone loss of muscle gain
of fat you've got all three things and
the morbidity and mortality of being
osteoar obesity
is three times what it would be if you
had one alone so it creeps up on you and
you can see how none of these tissues
are separate from each other it just
becomes this horrible storm and women
are like what happened to
me what's the remedy what's the remedy
for that well the remedy is
understanding that you can feel like
yourself again and here are the steps I
ask every woman going through this to do
number one you must make your estrogen
replacement decision I believe that that
decision to replace your estrogen must
be based on science and not the fear or
the myths that are circulating though
and I know you've had these
conversations but the Women's Health
Initiative study has been largely
overturned U and so every
woman is a sentient being with agency
ability to make their own decision and
they should make that decision and not
just go on here say so that's number one
let's make our decision if you make your
decision to do that which I have done I
replace my estrogen not for my hot
flashes night spits and brain fog those
go away
frankly I do it to preserve my bone my
muscle my brain and my
heart that's decision number one number
two you are never ever going to feel
better until you decide to invest every
day in your mobility and so what is
mobility it
is lifting heavy women have to put down
the Mambi pambi pink weights that we do
20 sets of because we don't want to bulk
up you're never going to bulk up unless
you do it purposely we must lift as
heavy as our bones will let us so for my
people I've simplified it into once you
have started enough that you feel
comfortable moving your body we must
lift four
rep four sets
of our major muscle groups in compound
motion so push pull with your upper body
bench press pull some kind of pull down
and then for the lower body it's squats
and deadlifts four reps four
sets in a progressive manner you can
start with 2 lbs but I want you to
progress up and then for the accessory
lifts that support the big compound
lifts like for instance for my for my
bench press I support that with biceps
triceps lats delts eight reps four sets
Okay that is the basis of lifting
heavy the other thing we need to do
is uh do a do our cardiovascular
training with 80% base training which is
lower heart rate I mean everybody's
talking about zone two I happen to in in
the place where my office is we have a
metabolic lab um that was built by by
enigo San Martin San Martino who's the
guru of Zone 2 and so we use his
protocol and that means that I need that
I need people to do uh 60% effort three
hours a week but that's not all twice a
week we're going to Sprint as hard as we
can and that freaks people out because
we're in the Olympic trial we're in the
Olympics right now and everybody thinks
it's supposed to look like that like the
like track and field trials what
sprinting means is you just work at
maximum heart your maximum 100%
effort for short bursts so 30 seconds
short burst hard as you can go and then
you recover for 2 to three minutes so
I'll give you a concrete example in my
life my base training heart rate because
I have the luxury of measuring it with a
lactate threshold is 130 beats per
minute I achieve that with an incline of
four to five and a speed of about 4.2
and it's a brisk walk it's almost on the
verge of having to jog for 45 minutes
when I'm done with that because that's
good for my cardiovascular base I punch
it up to 11 and I go as hard as I can
because I'm not very tall and I don't
want to fly off the back of the
treadmill but my heart rate goes up to
about 186 and I keep it there for 30
seconds what that does that will burn
40% more fat than just uh even
high-intensity interval training which
is is done at about 80% that amount of
effort Burns 40% more fat it is
stressful enough it offsets our normal
homeostasis enough that it um helps
stimulate the formation of more muscle
stem cells the the muscle perceives that
effort and so that is the the working
out portion of what we need to do and
then the smart anti-inflammatory
nutrition we need to get rid of simple
sugar we need one gram of protein per
ideal pound high quality protein what
does that mean we
need a very high concentration of one of
the branch chain amino acids called
Lucine Lucine is the most powerful amino
acid stimulus of the mtor uh muscle
building pathway Lucine is found in
highest
percentages in Whey Protein so you can
get it from plant protein but just in
much lower percentages whey has about
10%
Lucine and we know that's important to
Nature because mother's milk is mostly
whey which means it has the highest
amount of Lucine as we're trying to grow
muscle in our babies right so Lucine is
high in weight protein about 10% uh in
animal protein any kind of meat is is
about 8% and then beans and legumes and
plants are about 6.5 so can you get
enough protein from Plants sure you can
you just got to eat a lot of it like a
bull does what about fiber people are
going crazy for fiber at the moment it
seems 30 grams of fiber so that just
means complex carbs your microbiome
needs fiber
um it it it it's a slower digestion so
that we're not causing carb spikes I'm
not wearing it today it's first time in
about a year I haven't I am not diabetic
but I have worn a continuous glucose
monitor because I am just a data geek I
love my data I know exactly at this
point what foods will Spike my glucose
and how to keep my glucose steady all
day well it's been the most surprising
because I I literally have just taken my
continuous glucose monitor off I wore it
for the last two weeks while I was
filming uh TV show called Dragon's Den
yeah and I gave one to all of the
dragons with me and we've been talking
about it every day what was the most
surprising food for you that caused a
glucose Spike the surprising food
um well it wasn't surprising I mean I am
to the degree to which my glucose spikes
shot up is I am so sensitive to simple
carbs I can't even look at a simple carb
and it goes up to 165 which our body is
meant to respond to spikes I'm not
saying that you have to live like this
because I have also found that when I
only ate protein or most very low low
low carbs that I was so low energy I
would be slogging through my clinics and
I just need I could feel I needed energy
so now I've added sourdough to my
breakfast knowing that I'll get a small
Spike so that was very interesting to me
how ex extremely sensitive what's a
simple carb a simple carb is is sugar
ice cream white bread white potatoes
white pasta all the good stuff
annoyingly what is the what's the most
important thing that we haven't
discussed in your work or the most
important idea that I don't know has
changed your life maybe people don't
understand it or think about it enough
that's foundational to having a great
health span living long being healthy
all of those things that maybe we
haven't discussed yeah I want to address
that question in a couple ways number
one
um you have to we talked about temporal
disconnect and doing the things today
that feel good today but for the future
and so the way I really changed since
I've been through this is uh I have
thought ahead about what I want to be
when I'm 97 and how did I choose 97 well
I'm 57 now my daughter my youngest
daughter was born when I was 40 if I
want to be around to bug the heck out of
her until she is my age I need to live
till 97 what do I need to do to do what
I want when I want when I want it like
you can imagine I don't want to be told
what to do do I'm a surgeon I'm usually
in control of my environment and I think
people just want to be in control I want
to do what I want well what's it going
to take if I just wait until
63 when when my health span is over to
pay attention I'm never going to get
there so that has really pivoted my
mindset that I have to do it every day
now I don't love doing it I mean I'm not
going to lie to you I don't love going
and working out most days but with this
perspective I will but the other the
other tenant that I think is so
important we talked about lifting heavy
we talked about Zone 2 and sprinting
something I've layered on this
year uh is the concept of our V2 Max and
the fragility line fragility means you
get older slower
weaker uh you lose your functional
capacity 25% of all people are frail and
unable to live independently by the
they're 85 not on my watch and so um the
Frailty line is the cardiovascular
health that you need cardiovascular
capacity that you need to be independent
in your own home you may not be running
marathons so for men it's 18 uh
milliliters of oxygen per kilogram per
minute for women it's 16 so how do we
figure this out I would go have my have
you had your V2 Max tested uh I haven't
it's torture but you should do it I
think well I had a cardiovascular
examination and they made me sprit on a
treadmill yeah um and they were but they
were looking at my how well my heart
coped I don't know if they're measuring
my V they didn't yeah yeah you should do
it while you're young so you know your
base I didn't have a mask on yeah so
what it tells is your cardiovascular
capacity for for exchanging oxygen from
your blood to your lungs Elite athletes
like the tour to France have have V2
Maxes and the above 75 sometimes 200
they're just genetic
specimens um the 50th percentile for a
man your age is 55 the 50 of percentile
for a woman my age is 31 that's the
average right that's the average 50
percentile when I was 50 I'm going to
give you an example every decade we lose
10% of our V2 max if we don't do
anything about it that's just the way we
age 10% I can get it back there right
you can work at it
people who are out of shape can make
bigger Deltas getting it back people are
in extreme shape in the Delta smaller
because they start out well so for me
I'm going to give you an example so
people see how this works at 50 when I
was 50 I did it my V2 Max at that time
was 45 so at 60 if I lose 10% let's just
do big numbers I'll be down to 40 V2 Max
at 70 I'll be down to 35 at 80 I'll be
down to 25 I'm still above the Frailty
line at 90 I'll be 20 still above the
Frailty line not what I was at 50 but
not frail I can still live on my own so
what I've done now since the things that
I've talked to you about are a lifestyle
they don't take much energy because it's
just how I live I've layered on V2 Max
training which is a different way to do
cardio training it's 4 minutes as hard
as you can
go torture and then you recover for 4
minutes only four minutes and then four
minutes as hard as you can go the good
news is you only have to do that three
times or so once a week and it will work
you hard enough to maintain or improve
your frail your VO2 max Frailty line
that's something special that you can
add on once you've optimized your health
once you've done the Peak Performance
things we've talked about then you can
add those things
on okay well I better get I better get
on with it then don't feel guilty yeah I
need to go to the gym today but it's
certainly changed my perspective on what
I'll be doing in the gym and and also
why I'll be doing it I think I think the
why piece is so critical I think a lot
about discipline and incentives and why
certain behaviors occur and I wrote in
my my book that um I was trying to sort
of sort of simplify why some habits in
my life have stuck and others haven't
and then why some habits were I was a
bit of a yo-yo suddenly stuck and I held
them for 5 years and still to this day
and and others haven't and um I kind of
simp ified it down to this idea that the
discipline equation starts with the
strength of your why like so you've
given yourself a really strong Why by
having this sort of 97y old uh goal like
who I'm I'm going to be when I'm 97 and
then linking that to your daughter which
is a pretty strong why plus the the
enjoyment I get from the pursuit of the
goal and then minus the friction or the
like lack of Engagement from yeah the
hard like if the gym is really far away
if it takes too long if it if it's
embarrassing is friction so if I'm going
to a gym and I'm a guy there's lots of
beautiful people there and I'm
overweight so you know all that all of
that's friction so how do you like
influen that equation to increase your y
make it more enjoyable or
psychologically reinforcing the act of
the discipline and then kill all the
friction I possibly can and for me
that's where the habits we're talking
about today have really stuck yeah
interestingly I've said shared this
before but I'll share it again I was um
a yo-yo gym goer my gym routine and my
health strength routines were all very
inconsistent
theic and it was for me just see that
health is the foundation of all of our
Lives see that on a screen in lock that
the real sort of variance between
outcomes for people that got covid came
down to your sort of pre-existing health
and so at that point I thought oh my God
like it's not my business it's not my
dog it's not my girlfriend it's not my
my family that matter the most actually
number one the foundation in which all
those things sit is my health so that
became my first Foundation my
non-negotiable um and hopefully as you
say that'll mean that my kids when when
they arrive whenever whenever I become a
father um we have a dad until I'm
170 so that's the goal that's the goal
we have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next not knowing who
they're leaving it for and the question
left for you is what was the last time
you took an uncomfortable risk the last
time I took an uncomfortable risk and
what happened when I did was uh I am an
academic orthopedic surgeon would which
means I create big business and care and
practice within big Hospital Systems so
there's a big Safety Net in that but I
have always been what I've called an
entrepreneur meaning I'm using somebody
else's money somebody else's time and
but I'm building them a big business
three years ago I left that comfort in a
late stage of my career I left that
comfort and decided I know what I'm
doing I believe in myself I'm going to
spend my own money and I'm going to go
out on my own in private practice and
I'm going to uh build
these side businesses my keynote
speaking my Precision longevity
practices which are purely
entrepreneurial
Ventures and and at 57 to go out and
create my own business when all I have
ever known is a W2 tax form is a huge
risk for me and my family but but I love
that um um I am confident enough in my
own capacity Stephen and my own work
ethic that even if I had to go work at
Starbucks to bridge the gap that I'm
going to make this work and it's a it's
a very freeing and and beautiful mindset
to to take what I've learned this whole
career and do it for myself well it
certainly is working I think you'd agree
right it's great it is great I mean
you've galvanized a community online of
many millions of people you've written
some absolutely incred books all of
which I'll link below and you're still
doing um incredibly important work
through uh YouTube and through Instagram
and through all of your channels which
I'll link below as well and it's very
necessary work because you are your
confronting a mind virus that I think
can hold us back from living long happy
healthy lives and uh sometimes it's just
an idea right sometimes it's just an
idea that can change your life and it's
also conversely sometimes just an idea
that can ruin your life and I think the
work you're doing is replacing those
potentially inhibiting ideas with much
more constructive healthy positive
optimistic hopeful ones and for that I
thank you thank you
[Music]